# Lord of Misrule

It's Christmas time... 


https://archive.org/details/observationsonpo01branuoft/page/386/mode/2up
Observations on popular antiquities, chiefly illustrating the origin of our vulgar customs, ceremonies and superstitions: Arranged and rev., with additions
by Brand, John, 1744-1806; Ellis, Henry, Sir, 1777-1869

Publication date 1813

pp.387-

SPORTS, GAMES, Sec, at CHRISTMAS.

THE LORD OF MISRULE.

"Upon my life, I am a LORD, indeed;  
And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.  
Well, bring our Lady hither to our sight:  
And once again, a pot o'the smallest ale."

Shaksp. Tam. of the Shrew.

WARTON, in his History of English Poetry, tells us, that in an original Draught of the Statutes of Trinity College at Cambridge, founded in 1546, one of the Chapters is entitled, "De Praefecto Ludorum qui IMPERATOR dicitur," under whose direction and authority Latin Comedies and Tragedies are to be exhibited in the Hall at Christmas; as also Sex Spectacula, or as many Dialogues.

With regard to the peculiar business and office of Imperator, it is ordered, that one of the Masters of Arts shall be placed over the juniors every Christmass, for the regulation of their Games and Diversions at that season of festivity. His sovereignty is to last during the twelve days of Christmas: and he is to exercise the same power on Candlemas Day. His fee is forty shillings `[...]`.

In an audit-book of Trinity College in Oxford, for the year 1559, Mr. Warton found a disbursement "Pro prandio Principis NATALICII." A Christmas Prince, or Lord of Misrule, he adds, corresponding to the Imperator at Cambridge, was a common temporary Magistrate in the Colleges at Oxford. `[Hist. Eng. Poet. vol. ii. p. 380. Wood, in his Athena? Oxonienses, vol. ii. p. 239, speaking of a Manuscript which among other things contains "The Description of the Christmas Prince of St. John's College, whom the Juniors have annually for the most part elected from the first foundation of the College," says: "the custom was not only observed in that College, but in several other Houses, particularly in Merton College, where, from the first foundation, the Fellows annually elected, about St. Edmund's Day, in November, a Christmas Lord, or Lord of Misrule, styled in the Registers Rex Falarum and Rex Regid Fabarum; which custom continued till the Reformation of Religion, and then, that producing Puritanism, and Puritanism Presbytery, the profession of it looked upon such laudable and ingenious customs as popish, diabolical, and antichristian." Thus far Wood, who gives us also the titles, (ludicrous enough,) assumed by Thomas Tooker, when he was elected Prince: they will not be thought foreign to our purpose. "The most magnificent and renowned Thomas, by the favour of Fortune, Prince of Alba Fortunata, Lord of St. John's, High Regent of the Hall, Duke of St. Giles's, Marquis of Magdalen's, Landgrave of the Grove, Count Palatine of the Cloysters, Chief Bailiff of Beaumont, High Ruler of Rome, (Rome is a piece of land, so called, near to the end of the walk called non ultra, on the north side of Oxon), Master of the Manor of Walton, Governor of Gloucester Green, sole Commander of all Titles, Tournaments, and Triumphs, Superintendant in all Solemnities whatever." I fear the humour with which this bombast is so parsimoniously seasoned, can only be relished by an Oxonian, well acquainted with the Topography of that place and its environs. See similar Titles in the "Gesta Greyorum."]`

"When the Societies of the Law performed these Shews within their own respective Refectories, at Christmas, or any other festival, a Christmas Prince or Revel Master was constantly appointed. At a Christmas celebrated in the Hall of the Middle Temple in the year 1635, the Jurisdiction, Privileges, and Parade of this mock monarch are thus circumstantially described. He was attended by his Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, with eight white Staves, a Captain of his Band of Pensioners, and of his Guard; and with two Chaplains, who were so seriously impressed with an idea of his regal dignity, that when they preached before him on the preceding Sunday in the Temple Church, on ascending the pulpit they saluted him with three low Bows. He dined both in the Hall and in his Privy Chamber, under a Cloth of Estate. The pole-axes for his Gentlemen Pensioners were borrowed of Lord Salisbury. Lord Holland, his temporary Justice in Eyre, supplies him with venison, on demand; and the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London, with wine. On Twelfth Day, at going to Church, he received many Petitions, which he gave to his Master of Requests: and, like other kings, he had a favourite, whom with others, gentlemen of high quality, he knighted at returning from Church. His expences, all from his own purse, amounted to two thousand pounds." After he was deposed, the King knighted him at Whitehall. `[Hist. Eng Poet. vol. ii. p. 405. George Ferrers of Lincoln's Inn was Lord of Misrule or the merry disports for twelve days, when King Edward VI. kept his Christmass with open House at Greenwich A. D. 1553, to his Majesty's great delight iu the diversion. See Stowe's Chron. by Howes., ed. fol. 1631. p. 608. See also Holinshed, Chron. vol. iii. p. 1067. Dugdale, in his Origines Juridiciales, p. 156. speaking of the Fooleries of the Lord of Misrule in the Inner Temple on St. Stephen's Day, says: "Supper ended, the Constable-Marshall presented himself with Drums afore him, mounted upon a Scaffold born by four men, andgoeth three times round about the harthe, crying out aloud, 'A Lord, a Lord,' &c. Then he descendeth, and goeth to dance, &c. and after he calleth his Court, every one by name, e. g. Sir Randle Rackabite, of Raskall-Hall in the County of Rake-hell, &c. &c. This done, the Lord of Misrule addresscth himself to the Banquet: which ended with some Minstralsye, Mirth, and Dancing, eveiy man departeth to rest."]`

In the feast of Christmas, says Stow in his Survey, there was in the King's House, wheresoever he lodged, a *Lord of Misrule* `[In a Royal Household Account, communicated by Craven Ord, Esq. of the Exchequer, I find the following article: "From 16 to 18 Nov. 8 Hen. VII. Item, to Walter Alwyn for the Revells at Christenmes xiijl'. yjs. viijd."]`, or Master of merry Disports, and the like had ye in the House of every Nobleman of honour or good worship, were he spiritual or temporal `[[In the Northumberland Household Book, p. 344, we read: "Item my Lord useth and accustomylh to gyf yerely when his Lordship is home and hath an ABBOT of Miscrewll in Christynmas in his Lordschippis Hous upon New-yers-day in rewarde xxs." See also the Notes to the same work, p 441.] The following curious passage is from Roper's Life of Sir Tho. More, p. 3. "He was, by his Father's procurement, received into the House of the right reverend, wise, and learned prelate Cardinall Mourton, where (thoughe hee was yonge of yeares, yet) would he at Christmas tyd sodenh sometymes stepp in among the Players, and never studinge for the matter, make a parte of his ownr there presently amonge them, which made the lookers-on more sport than all the players besid. In whose witt and towardnesse the Cardinall much delightinge, would often say of him unto the Nobles that divers tymes dyned with him: 'This child here way ting at the Table, who soever shall live to see it, will prove a marvellous man'." Langley's Translation of Polydore Vergil, fol. 102 b. mentions "The Christemass Lordes, that be commonly made at the nativitee of our Lorde, to whom all the householde and familie, with the Master himself, must be obedient, began of the equabilitie that the Servauntes had with their Masters in Saturnus Feastes that were called Saturnalia: wherein the Servauntes have like autoiite with their Masters duryng the tyme of the sayd Feastes." Hinde, in his Life of John Bruen, Esq. an eminent puritan, born about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and who died in 1625, p. 86. censures those Gentlemen "who had much rather spend much of their estate in maintaining idle and base persons to serve their owne lustes and satisfie the humour of a rude and profane people as many do their Hors-riders, Faulkeners, Huntsmen, Lords of Misrule, Pipers, and Minstrels, rather to lead them and their followers (both in their publike Assemblies and private Families) a Dance about the Calfe, than such a Dance as David danced before the Arke, with spiritual rejoicing in God's mercies, &c." Sir Thomas Urquhart, in his most curious work, intitled, "The Discovery of a most exquisite Jewel found in the Kennel of Worcester Streets, the Day after the Fight," 1651, p.238, says, "They may be said to use their King as about Christmas we use to do the King of Misrule [Dugdale, in the Account of the grand Christmasses held in Lincolne's Inn, in his Orig. Juridic. p. 34. mentions the choosing "a king on Christmass Day."]; whom we invest with that title to no other end, but to countenance the Bacchanalian riots and preposterous disorders of the. Family where he is installed.' Christmas, says Selden, succeeds the Saturnalia, the same time, the same number of holy days, then the Master waited upon the Servant like the Lord of Misrule. See his Table Taik.]`. The Mayor of London and either of the Sheriffs `[In Stowe's Chronicle, by Howes, fol. 1631. p. 608, we read that Serjeant Vawce was Lord of Misrule to John Mainard, one of the Sheriffs of London in 1553. The keeping a Fool in a family to entertain them with his several pleasantries was anticntly very common. I have shewn in my History of Newcastle that the Mayor of that Town used to keep his Fool. The following passage I found in Lodge's Wits Miserie, or the Devils Incarnate of this Age, 4to. Lond. 1596. p. 73. "He is like Captain Cloux' Foole of Lyons, that would needs die of the sullens, because his master would entertaine a new Foole besides himselfe."]` had their several Lords of Misrule, ever contending, without quarrel or offence, who should make the rarest pastime to delight the beholders. These Lords, beginning their rule at Allhallond Eve, continued the same till the morrow after the feast of the Purification, commonly called Candlemas Day: in which space there were fine and subtle disguisings, masks, and mummeries, with playing at Cards for Counters, Nayles, and Points in every House, more for pastimes than for gaine. `[See Strype's Edit, of Stowe, B. i. p. 252.]`

TO DO

The following is too curious an account of the Lord of Misrule to be omitted here: it is extracted from a most rare book intituled, "The Anatomie of Abuses," by Phillip Stubs, 12mo. Lond. 1585. f. 92 b. Our author has been already noticed in the Account of May Customs as a rigid puritan.

"Firste, all the wilde heades of the parishe, conventynge together, chuse them a grand Capitaine (of mischeef) whom they innoble with the title of my Lorde of Misserule, and hym they crown with great solemnitie, and adopt for their kyng. This kyng anoynted, chuseth for the twentie, fourtie, three score, or a hundred lustie guttes like to hymself, to waite uppon his lordely majestic, and to guarde his noble persone. Then every one of these his menne he investeth with his liveries, of greene, yellowe, or some other light wanton colour. And as though that were not (baudie) gaudy enough I should saie, they bedecke themselves with scarffes, ribons, and laces, hanged all over with golde rynges, precious stones, and other jewelles: this doen, they tye about either legge twentie or fourtie belles with rich hande-kercheefes, in their handes, and sometymes laied acrosse over their shoulders and neckes, borrowed for the moste parte of their pretie Mopsies and loovyng Bessies for bussyng them in the darcke. Thus thinges sette in order, they have their Hobbie horsesh, Dragons, and other antiques, together with their baudie Pipers, and thunderyng Drommers, to strike up the Deville's Daunce withall', then marche these Heathen companie towardes the Church and Churche yarde, their Pipers pipyng, Drommers thonderyng, their stumppes dauncyng, their Belles iynglyng, their hatidkerchefes swyngyng about their heades like madmen, their Hobbie horses, and other Monsters skyrmishyng amongest the throng: and in this sorte they goe to the Churche, (though the Minister bee at Praier or Preachyng) dauncyng and swingyng their handkercheefes over their heades, in the Churche, like Devilles incarnate, with suche a confused noise, that no man can heare his owne voice. Then the foolishe people, they looke, they stare, they laugh, they fleere, and mount upon formes and pewes, to see these goodly pageauntes, solemnized in this sort. Then after this, aboute the Churche they goe againe and againe, and so forthe into the Churche yardek, where they have commonly their sommer haules, their Bowers)

l> See p. 219.

» He means here the Morris Dance.

k I find the following, in Articles to be enquired of within the Archdeaconry of Yorke, by the Churchwardens and Sworne Men, A.D. 163— , (any year till 1640.) 4to. Lond. 6. /. "Whether hath your Church or Church-yard beene abused and prophaned by any fighting, chiding, brawling,, or quarrelling, and Playes, Lords of Misrule, Summer Lords, Morris-Dancers, Pedlers, Bowlers, Bearewards, Butchers, Feastes, Schooles, Temporal Courts, or Leets, Lay-Juries, Musters, or other prophane usage in your Church or Church-yard.

Arbours, and Banquettyng Houses set up, wherein they feaste, banquet, and daunce all that daie, and (peradventure) all that night too. And thus these terrestrial furies spend their Sabbaoth daie.

"Then for the further innoblyng of this honorable Lurdane (Lorde I should save) they have also certaine papers, wherein is paynted some babblerie or other, of Imagerie worke, and these they call my Lord of Misrules badges, these thei giue to every one, that will geve money for them to maintaine them in this their Heathenrie, Divelrie, Whoredqme, Dronkennesse, Pride, and what not. And who will not shewe himselfe buxome to them, and geve them money for these the Deville's Cognizaunces, they shall be mocked, and flouted at shamefully. And so assotted are some that they not onely give them money, to maintaine their abhomination withall, but also weare their Badges and Cognizances in their Hattes, or Cappes, openly.

"An other sorte of fantasticall fooles, bring to these Helhoundes (the Lord of Misrule and his complices) some Bread, some good Ale, some newe Cheese, some olde Cheese, some Custardes, some Cakes, some Flaunes, some Tartes, some Creame, some Meate, some one thing, some another: but if they knewe that as often as they bring any to the maintenaunce of these execrable pastymes, they offer sacrifice to the Devill and Sathanas, they would repent, and withdrawe their handes, whiche God graunt they rnaie."

The name only of the Lord of Misrule is now remembered: The Lords of Misrule in Colleges were preached against at Cambridge1 by the Puritans in the

Lodge, in his Wits Miserie, already quoted, 4to. 1596, p. 84. speaking of A JEASTER, says, "This fellow in person is comely, in apparell courtly, but in behaviour a very ape, and no man: his studye is to coine bitter Jeastes, or to show antique motions, or to bing baudie sonnets and ballads: give him a little wine in his head, he is continually flearing and making of mouths: he laughes intemperately at every little occasion, and dances about the house, leaps over tables, outskips men's heads, trips up his companion's heeles, burns sacke with a candle, and hath all the feats of a Lord of Misrule in the countrie. It is a special marke of him at Table, he sits and makes faces.

1 See Warton's Observations on Spenser's Fairy Queen, vol. ii. p. 2 11. See also Fuller's Church History, fol. Lond. 1655. Hist, of Cambridge, p. 159. See also the Life of Dr. Dee in Joan. Glastoniensis Chronica. ed. Hearne, 8vo. Oxon, 1726. Append, p. 502. Dugd. Orig. Jurid. ed. 1671. pp. 154. 156. 247. 285.

reign of James the First, as inconsistent with a place of religious education and as a relict of the Pagan ritual™.

In Scotland, where the Reformation took a more severe and gloomy turn than in England, the Abbot of Unreason, as he was called, with other festive characters, were thought worthy to be suppressed by the Legislature as early as 1555". This Abbot of Misrule, or Unreason, appears to have borne much resemblance to the Abbas Stultorum, who presided over the Feast of Fools in France. At Rodez, the capital of the Province of Rovergne in France, they had an Abbe de la Malgouvernt, who corresponds exactly with our Abbot of Misrule0.

Fuller, in his "Meditations on the Times," in "Good Thoughts in Worse Times," 12mo. Lond. 16'47. p. 139. tells us: "Some sixty yeares since, in the University of Cambridge, it was solemnly debated betwixt the Heads to debarre^oung sehollers of that liberty allowed them in Christmas, as inconsistent with the Discipline of Students. But some grave Governors mentioned the good use thereof, because thereby, in twelve days, they more discover the dispositions of Scholars than in twelve moneths oefore."

m "If we compare," says Prynne, Histrio-Mastix. p. 757- "our Bacchanalian Christmasses and New Years Tides with these Saturnalia and Feasts of Janus, we shall finde such near affinitye betweene them both in regard of time (they being both in the end of December and on the first of January) and in their manner of solemnizing (both of them being spent in revelling, epicurisme, wantonesse, idlenesse, dancing, drinking, Stage-plafes, Masques, and carnall Pompe and Jollity), that wee must needes conclude the one to be but the very ape or issue of the other. Hence Polydor Virgil affirmcs in expresse tearmes that our Christmas Lords of Misrule (which custom, saith he, is chiefly observed in England) together with dancing, Masques, Mummeries, Stage-playes, and such other Christmass disorders now in use with Christians, were derived from these Roman Saturnalia and Bacchanalian Festivals; which (concludes he) should cause all pious Christians eternally to abominate them."

B See p. 213. [Dr. Jamieson says the prohibition does not appear to have been the effect of the Protestant Doctrine: for as yet the Reformation was strenuously opposed by the Court. He thinks it was most probably owing to the disorders carried on, both in town and country, under the pretence of innocent recreation. Etym. Diet.]

• See Du Tilliot Memoirs de la Fete des Fous, p. 22.

[Mr. Warton, in a Note on the History of English Poetry, says, "In the French towns there was L'Able de Liesse, who in many towns was elected from the burgesses by the magistrates, and was the director of all their public shews. Among his numerous mock officers were a herald, and a Malt re d'Hotel. In the city of Auxerre he was especially concerned to superintend the Play which was annually acted on Quinquagesima Sunday. Carpentier, Suppl. Gloss. Lat. Du Cange, lorn. i. p. 7. v. ABBAS LJETITI JE. See also, ibid. v. CHAR AVXRITUM, p. 923."]

IN "The Vindication of Christmas, or his Twelve Yeares Observations upon the Times," 4to. Lond. 1653, a very rare Tract, Old Christmas is introduced describing the former annual Festivities of the Season as follows: "After dinner we arose from the Boord and sate by the Fire, where the Harth was imbrodered all over with roasted Apples, piping hot, expecting a Bole of Ale for a cooler, which immediately was transformed into Lamb-wool. After which we discoursed merily, without either prophaness or obscenity; some went to Cards; others sang Carols and pleasant Songs (suitable to the times); then the poor labouring Hinds and Maid-servants, with the Plow-boys, went nimbly to dancing; the poor toyling wretches being glad of m.y Company,, because they had little or no sport at all till I came amongst them; and therefore they skipped and leaped for joy, singing a Carol to the tune of Hey,

"Let's dance and sing, and make good cheer, For Christmass comes but once a year."

"Thus at active Games and Gambols of Hot-cockles, Shooing the Wild Mare, and the like harmless sports, some part of the tedious Night was spent, and early in the morning I took my leave of them, promising they should have my presence again the next 25th of December."

Another account of the Christmas Gambols occurs in the curious Poem, "Batt upon Batt, upon the Parts, Patience, and Pains of Earth. Kempster," by a Person of Quality, 4th Edit.4to. Lond. 1694, p, 5.

"O mortal Man! is eating all you do ,At Christ-Tide? or the making Sing-Songs? No: Our Batt can dance, play at high Jinks with Dice, At any primitive, orthodoxal Vice. Shooing (he wild Mare, tumbling the young Wenches, Drinking all Night, and sleeping on the Benches. Shew me a man can shuffle fair and cut, Yet always have three Trays in hund at Putt: Shew me a man can turn up Noddy still, And deal himself three Fives too when he will:

Conclude with one and thirty, and a Pair, Never fail Ten in stock, and yet play fair, If Batt be not that Wight, I lose my aim*."

Stafforde, in his "Niobe, or Age of Teares," 12mo. Lond. ]6ll. p. 107. speaking of some deluded men, says, they "make me call to mind an old Christmas Gambole, contrived with a Thred, which being fastned to some Beame, hath at the nether end of it a sticke, at the one end of which is tied a Candle, and at the other end an Apple; so that when a Man comes to bite at the Apple, the Candle burnes his nose. The Application is as easy as the Trick common."

a Another enumeration of the festive Sports of this Season occurs in a Poem, already quoted more than once, intitled "Christmas," 1.285.

"Young Men and Maidens, now At Feed the Dove (with laurel leaf in mouth) Or Blindman's Buff, or Hunt the Slipper play, Replete with glee. Some, haply, Cords adopt; Or if to Forfeits they the sport confine, The happy Folk, adjacent to the fire, Their stations take; excepting one alone (Sometimes the social Mistress of the house) Who sils within the centre of the room, To cry the pawns; much is the laughter, now. Of such as can't the Christmas Catch repeat, And who, perchance, are sentenc'd to salute The jetty beauties of the chimney-back*, Or Lady's shoe: others, more lucky far, By hap or favour, meet a sweeter doom, And 011 each fair-one's lovely lips imprint The ardent kiss.

[Among the Garrick Plays in the British Museum, is "The Christmas Ordinary, a private Show^ wherein is expressed the jovial Freedom of that Festival: at it wot acted at a Gentleman't Home among other ftetefe. by W. K. Master of Arts," 4to. Lond. 1682.]

• The following from Goldsmith's Deserted Village must not be omitted:

"The Swain mistrustless of his smutted Face, While secret Laughter tittcr'd round the Place."


https://archive.org/details/sim_archaeologia-tracts-relating-to-antiquity_1817_18/page/312/mode/2up
Archaeologia, Or, Miscellaneous Tracts Relating to Antiquity  1817: Vol 18
Publication date 1817

pp312-332

XXXVIII. Observations on the Christmas Diversions formerly given by the Lord of Misrule, and on the King's Office of Revels and Tents: chiefly from Papers preserved at
Losely, near Guildford, in a Letter from WILLIAM BRAY,
Esq. Treasurer, to SAMUEL LYSONS, Esq. Vice President.


copy:  https://ia800708.us.archive.org/view_archive.php?archive=/22/items/crossref-pre-1909-scholarly-works/10.1017%252Fs0261340900024784.zip&file=10.1017%252Fs0261340900026333.pdf

XXXVIII. Observations on the Christmas Diversions formerly given by the Lord of Misrule, and on the King's Office of Revels and Tents: chiefly from Papers preserved at Losely, near Guildford, in a Letter from WILLIAM BRAY, Esq. Treasurer, to SAMUEL LYSONS, Esq. Vice President.

Read 7th Nov. 1816.
DEAR SIR,

AMONGST many curious papers preserved at Losely, near Guildford; the ancient seat of the Mores, and now possessed by their descendant James More Molyneux, Esq. are accounts relating to the Christmas Diversions given by the Lord of Misrule, and relating to the King's Office of Revells and Tents. The former may serve as an addition to the account of the Lord of Misrule, given by our late worthy Secretary, Mr. Brand; the latter I do not remember to have seen in print. If you think the following extracts worth laying before the Society, I have Mr. Molyneux's permission to communicate them.  
I am, Sir,  
Your most obedient and very humble Servant,  
WILLIAM BRAY.  
Great Russell Street, 6th Nov. 1816.

THE LORD OF MISRULE was the Title of one who furnished entertainment during the Christmas holidays, not in the King's palace only, but in those, as Stow tells us, of every nobleman of honour or good worship, were he spiritual or temporal. Strype's ed. Book I, p.246, says, that by an Act of Common Council, 1. 2. Ph. & Mar. for retrenching expenses, among other things it was ordered, that the Lord Mayor or Sheriffs shall not keep any Lord of Misrule in any of their houses. Our late worthy Secretary, Mr. Brand, in his curious Collection of popular Customs, (edited to so much advantage by Mr. Ellis, one of our present Secretaries,) has with his usual industry collected many particulars respecting this Officer, whose title seems to have been very appropriate, as Mr. Brand says that in some parishes one was chosen who with his attendants would go to the parish church and play their pranks there, though the minister were at his prayers or preaching. We may suppose that one who was to entertain the court, or the higher classes, would not be quite so gross, though perhaps the manners of the great in those days were less refined than they are at present.

Mr. Brand also gives us an account of the grave sages of the law being entertained in the same manner in their halls; a Christmas Prince or Revel-Master being constantly appointed. At one of these entertainments in the Middle Temple, in 1635, the jurisdiction, privileges, and parade of this mock-monarch are circumstantially described.

He was attended by his lord keeper, lord treasurer, eight white staves, a captain of his band of pensioners and of his guard, and two chaplains, who when they preached before him on the preceding Sunday in the Temple Church, on ascending the pulpit, saluted him with three low bows. `[As is now done at the Chapel Royal on preaching before the Ki]` He dined, both in the hall and in his privy chamber, under a cloth of estate. The pole-axes for bis gentlemen pensioners were borrowed from Lord Salisbury; Lord Holland, his justice in Eyre, supplied him with venison; the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London with wine. On the 12th, at going to church, he received many petitions, which he gave to his Master of Requests; and, like other kings, he had a favourite, whom with others, gentlemen of high quality, he knighted at returning from church. His expenses from his own purse amounted to £2000.

Mr. Evelyn, the celebrated author of the Sylva, in his MS. Diary, now in the family library at Wotton in Surrey, says,

"1 Jan. 1662, I was invited to the solemn foolery of The Prince de la Grange, at Lincoln's Inn, where came the King, the Duke of York, &c. It began with a great masque and a formal pleading before mock princes, grandees, nobles, and Knights of the Sun. He had his Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, and other royal officers, gloriously clad and attended. It ended in a magnificent banquet. One Mr. Lort was the young spark who maintained the pageantry.

"6th Jan. This evening, according to custom, his Majesty opened *The Revells* of that night by throwing the dice himself in the privy chamber, where was a table set on purpose. He lost his £100. The year before he won £1500. The ladies played very deep.

"9th Jan. 1668. After meeting at the Royal Society, I went to see the Revells at the Middle Temple, which is an old-but riotous custom, and has no relation to virtue or policy." `[ This M.S. of Mr.-Evelyn contains many curious particulars in the times of K. Charles II. and K. James II. with both of whom, and with their ministers, he had frequent and intimate intercourse. The public are likely to be favoured with a sight of it.]`

Grafton, in his Chronicle, tells us that the Duke of Somerset, being condemned to death on 16th Oct. 1551, though not beheaded till 22d January following, the people murmured against the Duke of Northumberland and others of the Lords, and, as the common fame went, the king took- it not in good part; wherefore as well to remove fond talk out of men's mouths, as to recreate the troubled spirit of the young king, it was desired that the feast of Christmas, then at "hand, should be kept at Greenwich, with open household and frank resort to the court, (which is called keeping the Hall). What time, of old ordinary course, there is always one appointed to make sport in the court, called commonly Lord of Misrule, whose office is not unknown to such as have been brought up in noblemen's hoUses, and among great housekeepers, which use liberal feasting in that season. There was, therefore, by order of the Counsaile, a Gentleman both wise and learned, whose name was Geo. Ferrers, appointed to that office for this year, who being of better calling than commonly his predecessors had been, received all his commissions and warrants by the name of the Master of the King's Pastimes. He so well supplied his office, both in shew of sundry sights, and devices of rare inventions, and in acts of divers enterludes and matters pastime played by persons, as not only satisfied the common sort, but also were very well liked and allowed by the counsaile and other of skill in the like pastimes; but best of all by the young King himself, as appeared by his princely liberality in rewarding that service.

Sir Richard Baker observes, that he gave great delight to many, and some to the King, but not in proportion to his heaviness.

Stow gives further particulars of the entertainment mentioned by Grafton. He says, that Mr. Ferrers being lord of the merrie disportes all the twelve days, so pleasantly and wisely behaved himself, that the King had great delight in his pastimes. On Monday the 4th of January, he came by water to London, and landed at the Tower wharf, entered the Tower, and then rode through Tower street, where he was received by Serjeant Vawce, Lord of Misrule to John Mainard one of the Sheriffs of London, and so was conducted through the city, with a great company of young lords and gentlemen, to the house of Sir Geo. Barne, Lord Mayor, where he with the chief of his company dined, and afterwards had a great banket, and at his departure the Lord Mayor gave him a standing cup with a cover of silver gilt, of the value often pounds, for a reward; he also set a hogshead of wine and a barrell of beer at his gate for his train that followed him; the rest of his gentlemen and servants dined at other Aldermen's houses and with the Sheriffs, and so departed to the Tower wharfe again, and to the court by water, to the great commendation of the Mayor and Aldermen, and highly accepted of the King and Counsaille.

In the reign of King Henry the VIIIth, there was an officer in the royal household called Master of the Tents and Revells, or Masks and Revells, whose business it was to keep the tents and pavilions belonging to the King, and which were often (if not always) sent with him on his removes or progresses. This officer had also the keeping of the dresses and masks which were used on entertainments given at court, and he was to provide such new ones as were wanted.

Under that Monarch the office was held by Tho. Cawarden, Esq. Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to the King; `[He was of a Cheshire family, had grants of several estates in Surrey from Hen. VIII. He died 20th Aug. 1 Eliz. 1559; and is buried in Blechingley church, where is a monument for him.]` he was afterwards knighted, and continued in his employment under King Edward the VIth.

Sir Edmund Tylney held it in the time of Queen Elizabeth.

In the time of King Charles the II. masks were much worn, and interludes were performed at court by ladies and gentlemen, so that probably the Master of the Masks and Revells had some employment. They do not seem to have been used since the accession of the present family to the throne; but the Revells remained, as the Kings George I. and II. played in public at the hazard table, which was attended by the Groom Porter, an officer who seems to have succeeded to the Master of the Revells. The practice and the office have been abolished in the present reign.

At Losely, near Guildford, in Surrey, the seat of James More Molyneux, Esq. are many curious papers of the time of Hen. VIII. Edw. VI. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, preserved by Sir Wm. More, the then owner of that estate (the present mansion having been built by him in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,) and by his son Sir George More; and amongst them are the particulars of the King's, expenses occasioned by the entertainment mentioned by Grafton and Stow: some of them are signed by Sir Tho. Cawarden. Although they do not profess more than to give an account of the expenses of the office, many particulars may be collected from them, especially as to the entertainment of the Lord of Misrule mentioned by Grafton and
Stow.

The title of this account is as follows:

"- - - - Sexto."  
The Revells. An estimate of the contents and value of soche parcells and stuff as was delyvered owte of the storehowses of the kinge his Maties Revells and Tentes to be imployed to the furnyture of the Lorde of Mysrule and his retynewe, appoyntedin the Corte to that purpose, duringe the time of Christmas, anno praedicto over and besydes the charge of all manner of furnyture and garnyshing, appoynted and incydent to and for himself and his bande and theire doings, bowghte and provided to that use and purpose, as by a like estimate of the same playnely maye apeare." 

The other charge above referred to is intitled,

"The Revells at Christmas, vidz. / For the Lord of Mysrule maskes and triumphes,   

Workes done w'in the same office aswell for the making and furniture of divers apparells liveies and properties for the Lorde of Mysrule, his retinewe and doings, w'in the time of Christmas aforesaid, as for the alteracon and furniture of certein Maskes fynyshed and occupied that tyme, and for the making, garnyshing, and settinge oute of Bases, barbes and caparisons wth trappors and complete furniture for iiij  Challengers and their xx horses, well appointed, prepared, and used in and for the tryumphe and Justes then done; wth the sumes of money dewe, aswell for the wages of ye w'kemen thereof, as to the Creditors for empsions and pvision of
the garniture and other necessaries, occupied and spent in and about the same, w'th all manner of cariages thereof, begynhinge the xij'th of December, a°. praedicto
and continued until the vij'th of January next ensuing as followith, vidz."

This great personage was attended by his heir apparent, three other sons, and two natural sons (here stiled base sons); counsellors, pages of honour, gentlemen ushers, Serjeants at arms, a provost marshal, under marshal, lieutenant of rdnance, heralds for himself, others for Venus, a trumpeter for himself and one for Venus, an orator, truchman, a jailor, footmen, a messenger, an Irish-man, an Irish-woman, six hunters, jugglers, a fool for his lordship, and one for Venus.

Part of the entertainment was the triumph of Mars and Venus, in which the former was represented by his lordship. It is not said by whom Venus was represented.

There were justs and tournaments, in which four challengers were provided with no less than twenty horses, properly caparisoned. Courts of justice must have been held, in which it should seem that the Lord himself represented the Judge, as no dress is mentioned for that officer; but there were counsellors, Serjeants at arms, marshal, under marshal, and a jailor, furnished with gyves and manacles, a pillory, stocks, a gibbet, a block for execution, and an axe; the axe indeed was made of wood, and unless one could suppose that this circumstance was intended to insinuate to the King, that no sharper should be used against his uncle the Duke of Somerset then under sentence of death in the Tower, it should seem extraordinary that such an apparatus should be exhibited at such a time. `[This seems to be a mistake in the date; the Duke of Somerset was condemned Oct. 1551, and executed 22d January following, both in the 5th of Edw. VI. the sixth year of whose reign did not begin till 28th Jan]`

The dresses provided were very splendid and expensive: to give all the particulars would be tiresome; but perhaps a specimen may not be amiss.

For Christmas day and that week, the Lord of Misrule himself had a robe of white bawdekyn, containing nine yeards, at l6s. a yard, garded with a great embroidered gard of cloth of gold, wrought in knots, fourteen yards, at 13s. Ad. a yard, having a furr of red feathers, with a cape of chamblet thrum. A coat of flat silver fine with works, five yards, at 50 shillings, with an embroidered gard of leaves of gold
and silk coloured, containing fifteen yards, at 20 shillings. A cap of maintenance of red feathers and chamblett thrum, very rich, with a plume of feathers. A pair of hosen, the breeches made of a garde of cloth of gold imbroidered in paynes, nine yards of garding, at 13s. 4d. lined with silver sarsnet, one ell at 8 shillings. A pair of buskins of white bawdekyn, one yard, at 16 shillings. A pair of pantacles of
brydges [qu. Bruges] sattin, 3s. 4d. A girdle of yellow sarsenett l6d.
The cost - - - 51l. 17s. 4d.

For New Year's Day and that week, he had a robe of red bawdekyn, nine yards, with a great embroidered gard of purple silver, fourteen yards; a coat of the same materials, and embroidered and garded in like manner; a pair of hosen slopwise, the breeches of cloth of gold, figured with velvett red and green, with a cut gard of cloth of gold on it; a pair of buskins of red bawdekyn. The cost, 34l. 14s.

A hunting coat of cloth of gold, figured with red and green velvet church-work, six yards, garded with a border of cloth of gold embroidered, thirteen yards, lined with under sleeves of white bawdekyn; a hat of plain cloth of gold, garnished with leaves of green satten. The cost - - - 19l., 14d. 4d.

For Twelfth Day and his progress in London, a robe of wrought purple furred velvet, the inside white and black, like powdered ermins, with a coat, a head-piece, and a scapler of the same, altogether thirteen yards and a quarter, at 30*. a yard, the garment welted about with blue and yellow gold tinsell, thirty yards of welting at 16d.; the hat garnished with purple velvet striped with threads of silver; an ell of white and blue taffeta for laces of the same, 22l. 17*. 6d.

A pair of hosen, the breeches of purple cloth of silver, welted with purple tinsell and gold.

A pair of buskins, striped purple velvet, with threads of silver, 26l. 1s. 0d.

The above sums are exclusive of workmanship and other necessary materials.

The heir apparent had a long fooles coat of yellow cloth of gold, all over figured with velvet, white, red, and green, seven yards and a half, at 40s., garded with plain yellow cloth of gold, at 33s. 4d.; a hood and a pair of buskins of the same, figured gold, and a girdle of yellow sarsnet.

A long fools coat of white and red bawdekyn, containing with the hood nine yards; a pair of buskins of crimson bawdekyn, eight oz. of black parsement lace for the garding. In all, 8l. 8s. 0d. Four long fool's coats of crimson taffeta and white sarsuet lined with gold and silver lawn, two of them garnished with tinsell gold, and two with yellow satten; four girdles of sarsenet.

Two lesser fool's roits attending on Venus, of white and orange colour satten payned, garded with green and yellow satten, 4l. 14s. 4d.

Dresses were in like manner provided for all the other performers above mentioned, and delivered out of the store of his Majesty's Revells and Tents, valued in the whole 262l. 1s. 4d. exclusive of workmanship and other necessary materials.

... continues ...


https://archive.org/details/bookofchristmasd00hervuoft/page/n9/mode/2up?q=%22lord+of+misrule%22
also https://archive.org/details/bookofchristmasd1888herv/page/78/mode/2up?q=%22lord+of+misrule%22

The Book of Christmas: descriptive of the customs, ceremonies, traditions, superstitions, fun, feeling, and festivities of the Christmas season
by Hervey, Thomas Kibble, 1799-1859

Publication date 1848

pp79-

So important were these Christmas celebrations deemed by our ancestors, and such was the earnestness bestowed upon their preparation, that a special officer was appointed for that purpose, and to preside over the festival with large privileges, very considerable appointments, and a retinue which in course of time came to be no insignificant imitation of a prince's. We are of course speaking at present of the officer who was appointed to the superintendence of the Christmas ceremonials at court. The title by which this potentate was usually distinguished in England was that of "Lord of Misrule," "Abbot of Misrule," or "Master of Merry Disports;" and his office was, in fact, that of a temporary "Master of the Revels" (which latter title was formerly that of a permanent and distinguished officer attached to the household of our kings). Accordingly we find that amongst those of the more powerful nobles who affected an imitation of the royal arrangements in their Christmas establishments, this Christmas officer (when they appointed one to preside over their private Christmas celebrations) was occasionally nominated as their "Master of the Revels." In the Household-Book of the Northumberland family, amongst the directions given for the order of the establishment, it is stated that "My lorde useth and accustomyth yerly to gyf hym which is ordynede to be the Master of the Revells yerly in my lordis hous in cristmas for the overseyinge and orderinge of his lordschips Playes, Interludes, and Dresinge that is plaid befor his lordship in his hous in the xijth dayes of Cristenmas, and they to have in rewarde for that caus yerly, xxx." In the Inns of Court, where this officer formed no part of a household, but was a member elected out of their own body for his ingenuity, he was commonly dignified by a title more appropriate to the extensive authority with which he was invested, and the state with which he was furnished for its due maintenance; namely, that of "Christmas Prince," or sometimes "King of Christmas." He is the same officer who was known in Scotland as the "Abbot of Unreason," and bears a close resemblance to the "Abbas Stultorum," who presided over the Feast of Fools in France, and the "Abbe de la Malgourverne," who ruled the sports in certain provinces of that kingdom. In a note to Ellis's edition of Brand's "Popular Antiquities," we find a quotation from Mr. Warton (whose "History of Enghsh Poetry" we have not at hand) in which mention is made of an "Abbé de Liesse," and a reference given to Carpentier's Supplement to Du Cange, for the title "Abbas Laelitise." We mention these, to enable the antiquarian portion of our readers to make the reference for themselves. Writing in the country, we have not access to the works in question, and could not, in these pages, go farther into the matter if we had.

We have already stated that the "Lord of Misrule" appears to bear a considerable resemblance to that ruler or king who was anciently appointed to preside over the sports of the Roman Saturnalia; and we find on looking farther into the subject, that we are corroborated in this view by one who, of course, asserts the resemblance for the purpose of making it a matter of reproach. The notorious Prynne, in his "Histrio-Mastix," affirms (and quotes Polydore Virgil to the same effect) that "our Christmas lords of Misrule, together with dancing, masques, mummeries, stage-players, and such other Christmas disorders, now in use with Christians, were derived from these Roman Saturnalia and Bacchanalian festivals; which," adds he, "should cause all pious Christians eternally to abominate them." We should not, however, omit to mention that by some this officer has been derived from the ancient ceremony of the Boy-Bishop. Faber speaks of him as originating in an old Persico-Gothic festival in honor of Buddha: and Purchas, in his "Pilgrimage," as quoted in the Aubrey manuscripts, says, that the custom is deduced from the "Feast in Babylon, kept in honour of the goddess Dorcetha, for five dayes together; during which time the masters were under the dominion of their servants, one of which is usually sett over the rest, and royally cloathed, and was called Sogan, that is, Great Prince."

The title, however, by which this officer is most generally known is that of Lord of Misrule. "There was," says Stow, "in the feast of Christmas, in the king's house, wheresoever he was lodged, a Lord of Misrule, or Master of merry Disports; and the like had ye for the house of every nobleman of honour or good worship, were he spiritual or temporal. Among the which the Mayor of London and either of the Sheriffs had their several Lords of Misrule ever contending, without quarrel or offence, which should make the rarest pastimes to delight the beholders."

Of the antiquity of this officer in England, we have not been able to find any satisfactory account; but we discover traces of him almost as early as we have any positive records of the various sports by which the festival of this season was supported. Polydore Virgil speaks of the splendid spectacles, the masques, dancings, etc., by which it was illustrated as far back as the close of the twelfth century; and it is reasonable to suppose that something in the shape of a master of these public ceremonies must have existed then, to preserve order as well as furnish devices, particularly as the hints for the one and the other seem to have been taken from the celebrations of the heathens. As early as the year 1489 Leland speaks of an Abbot of Misrule "that made much sport, and did right well his office." Henry the Seventh's "boke of paymentis," preserved in the Chapter House, is stated by Sandys to contain several items of disbursement to the Lord of Misrule (or Abbot, as he is therein sometimes called) for different years "in rewarde for his besynes in Christenmes holydays," none of which exceeded the sum of ^6. 13^-. 4^. This sum — multiplied as we imagine it ought to be by something hke fifteen, to give the value thereof in our days — certainly affords no very liberal remuneration to an officer whose duties were of any extent: and we mention it that our readers may contrast it with the lavish appointments of the same functionary in after times. Henry, however, was a frugal monarch, though it was a part of his policy to promote the amusements of the people; and from the treasures which that frugality created, his immediate successors felt themselves at liberty to assume a greater show. In the subsequent reign, the yearly payments to the Lord of Misrule had already been raised as high as ^15 6^. 8^/.; and the entertainments over which he presided were furnished at a proportionably increased cost.

It is not, however, until the reign of the young monarch, Edward the Sixth, that this officer appears to have attained his highest dignities; and during the subsequent reign we find him playing just such a part as might be expected from one whose business it was to take the lead in revels such as we have had occasion to describe; namely, that of arch-buffoon.

In Hollinshed's Chronicle, honorable mention is made of a certain George Ferrers, therein described as a "lawyer, a poet, and an historian," who supplied the office well in the fifth year of Edward the Sixth, and who was rewarded by the young king with princely liberality. This George Ferrers was the principal author of that well-known work, the "Mirrour for Magistrates;" and Mr. Kempe, the editor of the recently published "Loseley Manuscripts," mentions his having been likewise distinguished by military services, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. It appears that the young king having fallen into a state of melancholy after the condemnation of his uncle, the Protector, it was determined to celebrate the approaching Christmas festival with more than usual splendor, for the purpose of diverting his mind; and this distinguished individual was selected to preside ever the arrangements.

The publication of the "Loseley Manuscripts "enables us to present our readers with some very curious particulars, illustrative at once of the nature of those arrangements, and of the heavy cost at which they were furnished. By an order in council, — dated the 3Tst of September, 1552, and addressed to Sir Thomas Cawarden, at that time Master of the King's Revels, — after reciting the appointment of the said George Ferrers, the said Sir Thomas is informed that it is his Majesty's pleasure "that you se hym furneshed for hym and his bande, as well in apparell as all other necessaries, of such stuff as remayneth in your office. And whatsoever wanteth in the same, to take order that it be provided according ??He by yo"" discretion."

For the manner in which the Lord of Misrule availed himself of this unlimited order, we recommend to such of our readers as the subject may interest a perusal of the various estimates and accounts published by Mr. Kempe from the manuscripts in question. Were it not that they would occupy too much of our space, we should have been glad to introduce some of them here, for the purpose of conveying to the reader a lively notion of the gorgeousness of apparel and appointment exhibited on this occasion. We must, however, present them with some idea of the train for whom these costly preparations were made, and of the kind of mock court with which the Lord of Misrule surrounded himself.

Amongst these we find mention made of a chancellor, treasurer, comptroller, vice-chamberlain, lordscouncillors, divine, philosopher, astronomer, poet, physician, apothecary, master of requests, civilian, disard (an old word for clown), gentleman-ushers, pages of honor, sergeants-at-arms, provost-marshal, under-marshal, footmen, messengers, trumpeter, herald, orator; besides hunters, jugglers, tumblers, band, fools, friars (a curious juxtaposition, which Mr. Kempe thinks might intend a satire), and a variety of others. None seem in fact to have been omitted who were usually included in the retinue of a prince; and over this mock court the mock monarch appears to have presided with a sway as absolute, as far as regarded the purposes of his appointment, as the actual monarch himself over the weightier matters of the state. But the most curious part of these arrangements is that by which (as appears from one of the lists printed from these manuscripts) he seems to have been accompanied in his processions by an heir-at-law, and three other children, besides two base sons. These two base sons, we presume, are bastards; and that the establishment of a potentate could not be considered complete without them. The editor also mentions that he was attended by an almoner, who scattered amongst the crowd during his progresses, certain coins made by the wire -drawers; and remarks that if these bore the portrait and superscription of the Lord of Misrule, they would be rare pieces in the eye of a numismatist.

The following very curious letter, which we will give entire, will furnish our readers with a lively picture of the pageantries of that time, and of the zeal with which full-grown men set about amusements of a kind which are now usually left to children of a smaller growth. Playing at kings is in our day one of the sports of more juvenile actors. The letter is addressed by Master George Ferrers to Sir Thomas Cawarden; and gives some account of his intended entry at the court at Christmas, and of his devices for furnishing entertainment during the festival.

Sir, — Whereas you required me to write, for that y' busynes is great, I have in as few wordes as I male signefied to you such things as I thinke moste necessarie for my purpose.

ffirst, as towching my Introduction. Whereas the laste yeare my devise was to cum of oute of the mone (moon) this yeare I imagine to cum oute of a place called vastuin vactium, the great waste, as moche to saie as a place voide or emptie w^^'out the worlde, where is neither fier, ayre, nor earth; and that I have bene remayning there sins the last yeare. And, be-

ause of certaine devises which I have towching this matter, I wold, yf it were possyble, have all myne apparell blewe, the first dale that I p'sent my self to the King's Ma"*; and even as I shewe my self that daie, so my mynd is in like order and in like suets (suits) to shew myself at my comyng into London after the halowed daies.

Againe, how I shall cum into the Courte, whether under a canopie, as the last yeare, or in a chare triumphall, or uppon some straunge beaste, — that I reserve to you; but the serpente with sevin heddes, cauled hidra, is the chief beast of myne armes, and wholme^ (holm) bushe is the devise of my crest, my worde ^ is semper ferians, I alwaies feasting or keping holie daies. Uppon Christmas daie I send a solempne ambassad® to the King's Ma'® by an herrald, a trumpet, an orator speaking in a straunge language, an interpreter or a truchman with hym, to which p'sons ther were requiset to have convenient farnyture, which I referre to you.

I have provided one to plaie uppon a kettell drom with his boye, and a nother drome w'^ a fyffe, whiche must be apparelled like turkes garments, according to the paternes I send you herewith. On St. Stephen's daie, I wold, if it were possyble, be with the King's Ma"* before dynner. Mr. Windham, being my Admyrall, is appointed to receive me beneth the bridge with the King's Brigandyne, and other vessells apointed for the same purpose; his desire is to have the poope of his vessell covered was white and blew, like as I signefie to you by a nother P*.

1 The evergreen holly is meant, a bearing peculiarly appropriate to the lord of Christmas sports.

2 His motto or impress.

Sir George Howard, being my M'. of the Horsis, receiveth me at my landing at Grenwiche with a spare horse and my pages of hono^ one carieng my hed pece, a nother my shelde, the thirde my sword, the fourth my axe. As for their furniture I know nothing as yet provided, either for my pages or otherwise, save a hed peece that I caused to be made. My counsailo", with suche other necessarie psons y' attend uppon me that daie, also must be consydered. There maie be no fewer than sixe counsailo" at the least; I must also have a divine, a philosopher, an astronomer, a poet, a phisician, a potecarie, a m'' of requests, a sivilian, a disard, John Smyth, two gentlemen ushers, besides juglers, tomblers, fooles, friers, and suche other.

The residue of the wholie dales I will spend in oth(jr devises: as one daie in feats of armes, and then wolde I have a challeng pformed with hobbie horsis, where I purpose to be in pson. Another daie in hunting and hawking, the residue of the tyme shalbe spent in other devisis, which I will declare to you by mouth to have yo'' ayde and advice therin.

S', I know not howe ye be provided to furnish me, but suer methinks I shold have no lesse than five suets of apparell, the first for the daie I come in, which shall also serve me in London, and two other suets for the two halowed dales folowing, the fourth for newe yeares daie, and the fifte for XII* daie.

Touching my suet of blew, I have sent you a pece of velvet which hath a kinde of powdered ermaines in it, vearie fytt for my wering, yf you so thynke good. All other matters I referre tyll I shall speake with you.

George Ferrers.

In other letters from this Lord of Misrule to the Master of the Revels he applies for eight visors for a drunken masque, and eight swords and daggers for the same purpose; twelve hobby-horses, two Dryads, and Irish dresses for a man and woman; and seventy jerkins of buckram, or canvas painted like mail, for seventy "hakbuturs," or musketeers of his guard.

Such are some of the testimonies borne by the parties themselves to their own right pleasant follies, and the expense at which they maintained them; and to these we will add another, coming from an adverse quarter, and showing the light in which these costly levities had already come to be regarded by men of sterner minds so early as the reign of Elizabeth. The following very curious passage is part of an extract made by Brand, from a most rare book entitled "The Anatomie of Abuses," — the work of one Phillip Stubs, published in London in 1585, — and gives a quaint picture of the Lord of Misrule and his retainers, as viewed through Puritan optics.

"Firste," says Master Stubs, "all the wilde heades of the parishe conventynge together, chuse them a grand Capitaine (of mischeef) whom they innoble with the title of my Lorde of Misserule, and hym they crown with great solemnitie, and adopt for their kyng. This kyng anoynted, chuseth for the twentie, fourtie, three score, or a hundred lustie guttes like to hymself, to waite uppon his lordely majestic, and to guarde his noble persone. Then every one of these his menne he investeth with his liveries of greene, yellowe or some other light wanton colour. And as though that were not (baudie) gaudy enough I should sale, they bedecke themselves with scarffes, ribons, and laces, hanged all over with golde rynges, precious stones, and other jewelles: this doen, they tye about either legge twentie or fourtie belles with rich handkercheefes in their handes, and sometymes laied acrosse over their shoulders and neckes, borrowed for the moste parte of their pretie Mopsies and loovyng Bessies, for bussyng them in the darcke. Thus thinges sette in order, they have their hobbie horses, dragons, and other antiques, together with their baudie pipers, and thunderyng drommers, to strike up the Deville's Daunce withall" (meaning the Morris Dance), "then marche these heathen companie towardes the church and churche yarde, their pipers pipyng, drommers thonderyng, their stumppes dauncyng, their belles iynglyng, their handkerchefes swyngyng about their heades like madmen, their hobbie horses and other monsters skyrmishyng amongst the throng: and in this sorte they goe to the churche (though the minister bee at praier or preaghyng) dauncyng and swingyng their handkercheefes over their heades, in the churche, like devilles incarnate, with suche a confused noise that no man can heare his owne voice. Then the foolishe people, they looke, they stare, they laugh, they fleere. and mount upon formes and pewes, to see these goodly pageauntes, solemnized in this sort."

At the Christmas celebration held at Gray's Inn in 1594, to which we have already alluded, the person selected to fill the office of Christmas Prince was a Norfolk gentleman of the name of Helmes, whose leg, like that of Sir Andrew Aguecheek, appears "to have been formed under the star of a galliard." He is described as being "accomplished with all good parts, fit for so great a dignity, and also a very proper man in personage, and very active in dancing and revelhng." The revels over which this mock monarch presided were, as our readers will remember, exhibited before Queen Elizabeth; and it was the exquisite performance of this gentleman and his court which her Majesty described as bearing the same relation for excellence to those of her own courtiers which a banquet does to bread and cheese. We must refer such of our readers as are desirous of informing themselves as to the nature and taste of the devices which could make her Majesty so eloquent, to the "Gesta Grayorum;" contenting ourselves with giving them such notion thereof, as well as of the high dignities which appertained to a Lord of Misrule, as may be conveyed by a perusal of the magnificent style and titles assumed by Mr. Henry Helmes on his accession. They were enough to have made her Majesty jealous^ if she had not been so good-natured

a queen; for looking at the philosophy of the thing, she was about as much a mock monarch as himself, and could not dance so well. To be sure, she was acknowledged by this potentate as Lady Paramount; and to a woman like Elizabeth, it was something to receive personal homage from —

"The High and Mighty Prince Henry, Prince of Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia and Bernardia; Duke of High and Nether Holborn; Marquis of St. Giles and Tottenham; Count Palatine of Bloomsbury and Clerkenwell; Great Lord of the Cantons of Islington, Kentish Town, Paddington, and Knightsbridge; Knight of the most Heroicai Order of the Helmet, and Sovereign of the same "!

It is admitted that no man can be a great actor who has not the faculty of divesting himself of his personal identity, and persuading himself that he really is, for the time, that which he represents himself to be j his doing which will go far to persuade others into the same belief. Now as her Majesty has pronounced upon the excellence of Mr. Henry Helmes's acting, and if we are therefore to suppose that that gentleman had contrived to mystify both himself and her, she would naturally be not a little vain of so splendid a vassal. But seriously, it is not a little amusing to notice the good faith with which these gentlemen appear to have put on and worn their burlesque dignities, and the real homage which they not only expected, but actually received. If the tricks which they played during their "brief authority," were not of that mischievous kind which "make the angels weep," they were certainly fantastic enough to make those who are "a little lower than the angels" smile. A Lord Mayor in his gilt coach seems to be a trifle compared with a Lord of Misrule entering the city of London in former days; and the following passage from Warton's "History of English Poetry," exhibits amusingly enough the sovereign functions seriously exercised by this important personage, and the homage, both ludicrous and substantial, which he sometimes received: —

"At a Christmas celebrated in the hall of the Middle Temple, in the year 1635, the jurisdiction privileges and parade of this mock monarch are thus circumstantially described. He was attended by his Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer with eight white staves, a Captain of his Band of Pensioners and of his guard, and with two Chaplains ivho were so seriously impressed with an idea of his regal dignity that, when they preached before him on the precedi?tg Sunday in the Temple Church, on ascending the pulpit they saluted him with three low bows. He dined both in the Hall and in his Privy Chamber under a cloth of Estate. The pole-axes for his Gentlemen Pensioners were borrowed of Lord Salisbury. Lord Holland, his temporary justice in Eyre, supplies him with venison on demand; and the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London with wine.

On Twelfth-day, at going to Church, he received many petitions which he gave to his Master of Requests; and like other kings he had a favourite, whom — with others, gentlemen of high quality — he knighted at returning from Church."

The Christmas Prince on this occasion was Mr. Francis Vivian, who expended from his own private purse the large sum of £2,000 in support of his dignities. Really, it must have tried the philosophy of these gentlemen to descend from their temporary elevation, into the ranks of ordinary life. A deposed prince hke that high and mighty prince, Henry, Prince of Purpoole, must have felt, on getting up on the morrow of Candlemas-day, some portion of the sensations of Abou Hassan on the morning which succeeded his Caliphate of a day, when the disagreeable conviction was forced upon him that he was no longer Commander of the Faithful, and had no further claim to the services of Cluster-of-Pearls, Morning-Star, Coral-Lips or Fair-Face. In the case, however, of Mr. Francis Vivian, it is stated that after his deposition he was knighted by the king, — by way, we suppose, of breaking his fall.

In Wood's "Athenge Oxonienses," mention is made of a very splendid Christmas ceremonial observed at St. John's College, Oxford, in the reign of our first James, which was presided over by a Mr. Thomas Tooker, whom we elsewhere find called ''Tucker." From a manuscript account of this exhibition, Wood quotes the titles assumed by this gentleman in his character of Christmas Prince; and we will repeat them here, for the purpose of showing that the legal cloisters were not the onlyones in which mirth was considered as no impeachment of professional gravity, and that humor (such as it is) was an occasional guest of the wisdom which is proverbially said to reside in wigs — of all denominations. From a comparison of these titles with those by which Mr. Henry Helmes illustrated his own magnificence at Gray's Inn, our readers may decide for themselves upon the relative degrees of the wit which flourished beneath the shelter of the respective gowns. Though ourselves a Cantab, we have no skill in the measurement of the relations of small quantities. Of the hearty mirth in each case there is little doubt; and humor of the finest quality could have done no more than produce that effect, and might probably have failed to do so much. The appetite is the main point. "The heart's all," as Davy says. A small matter made our ancestors laugh, because they brought stomachs to the feast of Momus. And, Heaven save the mark! through how many national troubles has that same joyous temperament (which is the farthest thing possible from levity, — one of the phases of deep feehng, — ) helped to bring the national mind! The "merry days" of England were succeeded by what may be called her ''age of tears,"' — the era of the sentimentalists, when young gentlemen ceased to wear cravats, and leaned against pillars in drawing-rooms in fits of moody abstraction or under the influence of evident inspiration, and young ladies made lachrymatories of their boudoirs, and met together to weep, and in fact went through the world weeping. Amid all its absurdity, there was some real feeling at the bottom of this too; and therefore it, too, had its pleasure. But there is to be an end of this also. Truly are we falling upon the "evil days" of which we may say we "have no pleasure in them." Men are neither to laugh nor smile, now, without distinctly knowing why. We are in the age of the philosophers. — All this time, however, Mr. Thomas Tucker is waiting to have his style and titles proclaimed; and thus do we find them duly set forth: —

"The most magnificent and renowned Thomas, by the favor of Fortune, Prince of Alba Fortunata, Lord of St. John's, High Regent of the Hall, Duke of St. Giles's, Marquis of Magdalen's, Landgrave of the Grove, Count Palatine of the Cloysters, Chief Bailiff of Beaumont, High Ruler of Rome, Master of the Manor of Walton, Governor of Gloucester Green, sole Commander of all Titles, Tournaments, and Triumphs, Superintendent in all Solemnities whatever."

From these titles, — as well as from those which we have already mentioned as being assumed by the courtiers of the illustrious Prince of Sophie, our readers will perceive that alliteration was an esteemed figure in the rhetoric of the revels.

In order to give our readers a more Hvely idea of this potentate, we have, as the frontispiece to our second part, introduced a Lord of Misrule to preside over the Christmas sports therein described. Although the titles with which we have there invested him are taken from the "Gesta Grayorum," the dress in which the artist has bestowed him is not copied from any one of the particular descriptions furnished by the different records. He is intended to represent the ideal of a Christmas prince, and not the portrait of any particular one of whom we have accounts. The artist's instructions were therefore confined to investing him with a due magnificence (referring to the records only so far as to keep the costume appropriate) and with a complacent sense of his own finery and state, and we think that Mr. Seymour has succeeded very happily in catching and embodying the mock heroic of the character. The Prince of Purpoole, or His Highness of Sophie, must have looked just such a personage as he has represented.

We must not omit to observe that a corresponding officer appears to have formerly exercised his functions at some of the colleges at Cambridge, under the more classical title of Imperator. And we must further state that at Lincoln's- Inn, in the early times of their Christmas celebrations, there appear to have been elected (besides the Lord of Misrule, and, we presume, in subordination to him) certain dignitaries exercising a royal sway over the revelries of particular days of the festival. In the account given by Dugdale of the Christmas held by this society in the ninth year of the reign of Henry VI 1 1., mention is made — besides the Marshal and (as he is there called) the Master of the Revels — of a King chosen for Christmas day, and an officer for Childermas day having the title of King of the Cockneys. A relic of this ancient custom exists in the Twelfth Night King, whom it is still usual to elect on the festival of the Epiphany, and of whom we shall have occasion to speak at length in his proper place.

The length of the period over which the sway of this potentate extended does not seem to he very accurately defined, or rather it is probable that it varied with circumstances. Strictly speaking, the Christmas season is in our day considered to terminate with Twelfth Night, and the festival itself to extend over that space of time of which this night on one side and Christmas eve on the other are the hmits. In ancient times, too, we find frequent mention of the twelve days of Christmas. Thus the George Ferrers of whom we have spoken, is appointed "to be in his hyness household for the twelve days;" and he dates one of his communications to Sir Thomas Cawarden, ^' From Greenwich y^ second of January and y^ ix*'' day of o"" rule." In the extract from the Household-Book of the Northumberland family which we have already quoted, mention is also made of the "Playes, Interludes and Dresinge that is plaid befor his lordship in his hous in the xijth dayes of Christenmas." Stow, however, says that "these Lords beginning their rule at Allhallond Eve, continued the same till the morrow after the Feast of the Purification, commonly called Candlemas day;" and that during all that time there were under their direction "fine and subtle disguisings, masks and mummeries, with playing at cards for counters, nayles and points in every house, more for pastimes than for gaine." This would give a reign of upwards of three months to these gentlemen. Dugdale, in describing the revels of the Inner Temple speaks of the three principal days being All-hallows, Candlemas, and Ascension days, — which would extend the period to seven months; and the masque of which we have spoken as forming the final performance of the celebrated Christmas of 1594, described in the "Gesta Grayorum," is stated to have been represented before the queen at Shrovetide. At the Christmas exhibition of St. John's college, Oxford, held in 1607, Mr. Thomas Tucker did not resign his office till Shrove-Tuesday; and the costly masque of which we have spoken as being presented by the four Inns of Court to Charles I., and whose title was "The Triumph of Peace," was exhibited in February of 1633. In Scotland, the rule of the Abbot of Unreason appears to have been still less limited in point of time; and he seems to have held his court and made his processions at any period of the year which pleased him. These processions, it appears, were very usual in the month of May (and here we will take occasion to observe parenthetically, but in connection with our present subject, that the practice at all festival celebrations of selecting some individual to enact a principal and presiding character in the ceremonial is further illustrated by the ancient May King, and by the practice, not yet wholly forgotten, of crowning on the first of that month a Queen of the May. This subject we shall have occasion to treat more fully when we come to speak in some future volume of the beautiful customs of that out-of-doors season).

From what we have stated, it appears probable that the officer who was appointed to preside over the revels so universally observed at Christmas time, extended, as a matter of course, his presidency over all those which — either arising out of them or unconnected therewith — were performed at more advanced periods of the succeeding year; that in fact, the Christmas prince was, without new election, considered as special master of the revels till the recurrence of the season. It is not necessary for us to suppose that the whole of the intervals lying between such stated and remote days of celebration were filled up with festival observances; or that our ancestors, under any calenture of the spirits, could aim at extending Christmas over the larger portion of the year. It is, however, apparent that although the common observances of the season were supposed to fall within the period bounded by the days of the Nativity and the Epiphany, the special pageantries with a view to which the Lords of Misrule were appointed in the more exalted quarters were in years of high festival spread over a much more extended time, and that their potential dignities were in full force, if not in full display, from the eve of All-hallows to the close of Candlemas day. It is stated in Drake's "Shakspeare and his Times," that the festivities of the season, which were appointed for at least twelve days, were frequently extended over a space of six weeks; and our readers know from their own experience that, even in these our days of less prominent and ceremonial rejoicing, the hoHday-spirit of the season is by no means to be restrained within the narrower of those limits. The Christmas feeling waits not for Christmas day. The important preparations for so great a festival render this impossible. By the avenues of most of the senses, the heralds of old Father Christmas have long before approached to awake it from its slumber. Signal notes which there is no mistaking, have been played on the visual and olfactory organs for some time past, and the palate itself has had foretastes of that which is about to be. From the day on which his sign has been seen in the heavens, the joyous influences of the star have been felt and the moment the school-boy arrives at his home he is in the midst of Christmas. And if the ''coming events" of the season "cast their shadows before," so, amid all its cross-lights it would be strange if there were no reflections flung behind. The merry spirit which has been awakened and suffered to play his antics so long is not to be laid by the exorcism of a word. After so very absolute and unquestioned a sway, it is not to be expected that Momus should abdicate at a moment's notice. Accordingly, we find that, any thing enacted to the contrary notwithstanding, the genial feelings of the time and the festivities springing out of them contrive to maintain their footing throughout the month of January; and Christmas keeps lingering about our homes till he is no longer answered by the young glad voices to whom he has not as yet begun to utter his solemn warnings and expound his sterner morals, and for whom his coming is hitherto connected with few memories of pain. Till the merry urchins have gone back to school there will continue to be willing subjects to the Lord of Misrule.

In Scotland, the Abbot of Unreason was frequently enacted by persons of the highest rank; and James V. is himself said to have concealed his crown beneath the mitre of the merry abbot. As in England, his revels were shared by the mightiest of the land; but they appear to have been of a less inoffensive kind and to have imitated more unrestrainedly the license of the Roman Saturnalia than did the merry-makings of the South. The mummeries of these personages (a faint reflection of which still exists in the Guisars whom we shall have to mention hereafter), if less costly than those of their brethren in England, were not less showy; and though much less quaint, were a great deal more free. "The body-guards of the Abbot of Unreason were all arrayed in gaudy colors bedecked with gold or silver lace, with embroidery and silken scarfs, the fringed ends of which floated in the wind. They wore chains of gold or baser metal gilt and glittering with mock jewels. Their legs were adorned and rendered voluble by links of shining metal hung with many bells of the same material twining from the ankle of their buskins to their silken garters, and each flourished in his hand a rich silk handkerchief brocaded over with flowers. This was the garb of fifty or more youths, who encircled the person of the leader. They were surrounded by ranks, six or more in depth, consisting of tall, brawny, fierce-visaged men covered with crimson or purple velvet bonnets, and nodding plumes of the eagle and the hawk, or branches of pine, yew, oak, fern, boxwood, or flowering heath. Their jerkins were always of a hue that might attract the eye of ladies in the bower or serving- damsels at the washing-green. They had breeches of immense capacity so padded or stuffed as to make each man occupy the space of five in their natural proportions; and in this seeming soft raiment they concealed weapons of defence or offence, with which to arm themselves and the body-guard if occasion called for resistance. To appearance, they had no object but careless sport and glee, — some playing on the Scottish harp, others blowing the bagpipes or beating targets for drums, or jingling bells. Whenever the procession halted they danced, flourishing about the banners of their leader. The exterior bands perhaps represented in dumb show or pantomime the actions of warriors or the wildest buffoonery; and these were followed by crowds who, with all the grimaces and phrases of waggery, solicited money or garniture from the nobles and gentry that came to gaze upon them. Wherever they appeared, multitudes joined them, some for the sake of jollity, and not a few to have their fate predicted by spae-wives, warlocks, and interpreters of dreams, who invariably were found in the train of the Abbot of Unreason."

In England, not only was this merry monarch appointed over the revelries of the great and the opulent, but — as of most of the forms of amusement over which he presided, so of the president himself — we find a rude imitation in the Christmas celebrations of the commonalty. Nor was the practice confined to towns or left exclusively in the hands of corporate or public bodies. The quotation which we have already made from Stubs's "Anatomie of Abuses," refers to a rustic Lord of Misrule; and while the antics which took place under his governance do not seem to have risen much above the performances of the morrisdancers, the gaudiness of the tinsel attire paraded by him and his band forms an excellent burlesque of the more costly finery of their superiors. Nay, the amusements themselves exhibit nearly as much wisdom as those of the court (with less of pretension), and we dare say created a great deal more fun at a far less cost. As to the Scottish practices, our readers will not fail to observe from our last quotation that the lordly Abbot and his train were little better than a set of morris-dancers themselves, and that so much of their practices as was innocent differed nothing from those which Stubs and his brother Puritans deemed so ridiculous in a set of parish revellers. In fact, the Lord of Misrule seems to have set himself up all over the land; and many a village had its master Simon who took care that the sports should not languish for want of that unity of purpose and concentration of mirth to which some directing authority is so essential.

We have already stated, and have made it quite apparent in our descriptions, that the Christmas celebrations of the more exalted classes are not put forward for the consideration of our readers on the ground of any great wisdom in the matter or humor in the manner of those celebrations themselves. But we claim for them serious veneration, in right of the excellence of the spirit in which they originated, and the excellence of the

...

In England, it is true that, according to Sandys, an order of the common council had issued as early as the beginning of our Mary's reign prohibiting the Lord Mayor or Sheriffs from entertaining a Lord of Misrule in any of their houses; but this appears to have been merely on financial grounds, with a view of reducing the corporation expenditure, and to have extended no further.

It was not, however, until after the breaking out of the Civil War that the persecution of the Puritans (who had long and zealously labored not only to resolve the various ceremonials of the season into their pagan elements, but even to prove that the celebration of the Nativity at all was in itself idolatrous) succeeded to any extent in producing that

result which the war itself and the consequent disorganization of society must in a great measure have effected even without the aid of a fanatical outcry. In the very first year of that armed struggle the earliest successful blow was struck against the festivities with which it had been usual to celebrate this period of the year, in certain ordinances which were issued for suppressing the performance of plays and other diversions; and in the following year some of the shops in London were for the first time opened on Christmas day, in obedience to the feelings which connected any observance of it with the spirit of popery. By the year 1647 ^^^ Puritans had so far prevailed that in various places the parish officers were subjected to penalties for encouraging the decking of churches and permitting divine service to be performed therein on Christmas morning; and in the same year the observance of the festival itself, with that of other holidays, was formally abolished by the two branches of the legislature.

It was found, impossible however, by all these united means, to eradicate the Christmas spirit from the land; and many of its customs and festivities continued to be observed, not only in obscure places, but even in towns, in spite of prohibition and in spite of the disarrangement of social ties. The contest between the Puritan spirit and the ancient spirit of celebration led to many contests; and we have an account — in a little book of which we have seen a copy in the British Museum, entitled "Canterbury Christmas, or a True Relation of the Insurrection in Canterbury" — of the disturbances which ensued in that city upon the Mayor's proclamation, issued in consequence of that Parliamentary prohibition at the Christmas which followed. This said proclamation, it appears, which was made by the city crier, was to the effect "that Christmas day and all other superstitious festivals should be put downe and that a market should be kept upon Christmas day." This order, it goes on to state, was "very ill taken by the country," the people of which neglected to bring their provisions into the town, and gave other tokens of their displeasure of a less negative kind. For, a few of the shopkeepers in the city, "to the number of twelve at the most," having ventured to open their shops in defiance of the general feeling, "they were commanded by the multitude to shut up again; but refusing to obey, their ware was thrown up and down and they at last forced to shut in."

Nor were the revilings of the Puritans against the lovers of Christmas observances suffered to remain unanswered. Many a squib was directed against the Roundheads; and the popular regret for the suppression of their high festival was skilfully appealed to by Royalist politicians and favorers of the ancient religion. The connection between the new condition of things in Church and State and the extinction of all the merriment of the land was carefully

---



https://archive.org/details/hierurgiaanglic03socigoog/page/n274/mode/2up?q=%22lord+of+misrule%22
Hierurgia Anglicana: Or Documents and Extracts Illustrative of the Ritual of the Church in ...
by Ecclesiological Society

Publication date 1848



https://archive.org/details/historyofcourtfo00doraiala/page/96/mode/2up
The history of court fools
by Doran, Dr. (John), 1807-1878

Publication date 1858


https://archive.org/details/lancashireglean02axongoog/page/n58/mode/2up?q=%22lord+of+misrule%22

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000407/19381230/207/0012
Western Gazette - Friday 30 December 1938
"LORD OF MISRULE" CHRISTMAS CUSTOMS OF THE MIDDLE AGES WHEN RELATIONSHIPS WERE TURNED UPSIDE DOWN [BY ISABEL WYATT.] The Lord of Misrule was the officer appointed in the courts and castles of mediaeval times to act as master of the revels at Christmas-time. As regard his origin, Fraser, in his Golden Bough, deduces from the rude, boisterous, and topsy-turvy nature of the revels that the Lord of Misrule was the Christian descendant of the pagan King of the Roman Saturnalia; certainly the revels themselves had much in common with the Saturnalia, and the Lord of Misrule with the King who represented Saturn. Snell says, in his Customs of Old England: "The distinctive feature of the Saturnalia was the inversion of ordinary relationships; the world was turned upside down, and the licence that prevailed, by dint of long usage and inviolable sentiment, imparted to the merry-making a rough and even immoral character. Slaves assumed the position of masters, and masters of slaves; and the general nature of the observances is aptly described by the patron deity in Lucian's play on the subject: 'During my reign of a week no one may attend to his business, but only to drinking, singing, playing. making imaginary kings, playing servants at table with their masters.' The advent of Christianity was impotent to arrest the annual scenes of disorder; and in some form or another the tradition held its own down through the Dark Ages, and we meet with the substance of the Saturnalia in burlesque festivals during the centuries immediately preceding the Reformation."

MISRULE CONTROLLED BY LAW.

The dates of the Saturnalia approximated with those of the Christmas festival, beginning on December 17th and continuing for a week. By the sixteenth century we find that the reign of the Lord of Misrule had been extended at both ends, so that it began as early as All Hallows Eve, and did not end until Candlemas. Great Britain even has some legislation concerned with these mockmonarchs; in 1555 for example, an Act was passed, severely curtailing the enormous expense entailed by the Lords of Misrule of the Tudor mayor and sheriffs of London, while in the same year an Act was passed suppressing them altogether in Scotland, where they were known as the Abbots of Unreason. Sir Walter Scott, in *The Abbot*, introduces an Abbot Unreason, explaining in his notes: "The Roman Catholic church connived at the frolics of the rude vulgar, who, in almost all Catholic countries, enjoyed, or at least assumed, the privilege of making some Lord of the Revels, who, under the name of the Abbot of Unreason, the Boy-Bishop, or the President of Fools, occupied the churches, profaned the holy places by a mock imitation of the sacred rites, and sang indecent parodies of the hvmns of the church."

"FROLICKSOME MONARCH."

Some of the varied functions of what Strutt has called "this frolicksome monarch" are suggested by the following gleanings from some of the old writers. Leland says, writing in 1489: "This Christmas I saw no disguiseings at court, and right few playes; but there was an Abbot of Misrule that made much sport, and did right well his office." Stow says, in his *Survey of London*: "At the feast of Christmas there was in the king's house, wherever chanced to reside, a Lord of Misrule appointed, to be master of merry disports. And the like had ye in the house of every nobleman of honour or good worship, were he spiritual or temporal. And among the rest, the lord mayor of London and the sheriffs had severally of them their Lord of Misrule, ever contending, without quarrel or offence, who should make the rarest pastimes to delight the beholders. This pageant potentate began his rule Allhallow eve, and continued the same till the morrow after the Feast of the Purification, in which space there were fine and subtle disguisings, masks, and mummeries."

Holinshed, writing in 1578, says in his *Chronicles of England*: "What time there is alwayes one appointed to make sporte at courte called commonly Lorde of Misrule, whose office is not unknowne to such as have bene brought up in noblemens houses and among great housekeepers, which use liberal feasting in the season;" and he tells of how one George Ferrers, in the fifth year of King Edward VI., "so well supplied his office, both of shew of sundry sights and devises of rare invention and in act of divers interludes and matters of pastime played by persons, as not only satisfied the common sorte but also were verie well liked and allowed by the council and others of skill in lyke pastimes; but best by the young himselfe, as appeared by his princely liberalitie in rewarding that service."

A QUAINT DESCRIPTION.

That the Lord of Misrule spread from aristocratic circles until he was to found misruling the revels of prince and peasant alike is shown by Stubbs, who, writing in 1595, says in his *Anatomie of Abuses*: "First of all, the wild heades of the parish flocking togither, chuse them a graund Captaine of Mischiefe, and him they crowne with great solemnity and adopt him for their kinge. This kinge annoynted chuseth forth twentie, fourtie, threescore, or an hundred lustie guttes like to himself to waite upon his lordlie majestie and to guarde his noble person. Then every one of these men he investeth with his liveries of greene, yellow, or some other light wanton colour, and as though they were not, gaudy ynough. they bedecke themselves with scarffes, ribbons, and laces, hanged all over with gold ringes, pretious stones, and other jewels. This done, they tie aboute either legge twentie or fourtie belles, with riche handkexchiefes in their handes and sometimes laide acrosse over their shoulders and neckes, borrowed for the most part, of their pretie mopsies and loveing Bessies. Thus all thinges set in order, then have they their hobby horses, their dragons, and other antiques, together with their baudie pipers and thundring drummers, to strike up the devil's daunce with all. Then march this heathen companie towards the church, their pypers pyping, their drummers thundring, their stum pes dauncing, their belles jyngling, their handkerchiefes fluttering aboute their like madde men, their hobbie horses and other monsters skirmishing amongst the throng: and in this sorte they go to the church, though the minister be at prayer or preaching, dauncing, and singing like devils incarnate, with such confused noise that no man can heare his owne voyce. Then the foolish people they looke, they stare, they laugh, they fleere. and mount upon the formes and pewes see these goodly pageants solemnized. Then after this, aboute the church they go againe and againe, and so fourthe into the churche yard, where they have commonly their sommer-halls their bowers, arbours, and banquetting-houses set up, wherein they feast, banquet, and daunce all that day, and paradventure all that night too; and thus these terrestial furies spend the sabbath day. Then, for the further innobling of this honourable lardane. they have certaine papers wherein is painted some babelerie or other of imagerie worke, and these they call my Lord of Misrule's badges or cognizances. These they give to every one that will give them money maintaine them in this their heathenish devilrie; and who will not show himself buxome to them and give them money, they shall be mocked and flouted shamefully; yea. and many times carried upon a cowlstaffe, and dived over heade and eares water, or otherwise most horribly abused. And so besotted are some that they not only give them money but weare their badges or cognizances in their hates or cappes openly. Another sorte of fantasticall fooles bring to these helhounds, the Lord of Misrule and his complices, some bread, some good ale, some new cheese some old cheese, some custardes. some cracknels, some cakes, some flauns, some tartes, some creame, some meat, some one thing, and some another."

SPREAD TO THE SUMMER.

It would seem from this that Stubbs was not one of those who looked upon the Lord of Misrule with an indulgent eye! It would also seem that the dominion of the Lord of Misrule had not only spread down the social scale but had also spread along the seasons since he and his retainers had their "sommerhalls' in the churchyard, and spent not only the day there, but the night also. This explains why. although the Lord of Misrule was originally a Christmas potentate, a Puritan writer in Commonwealth times writes of him thus: "On May-days the folk would choose them a Lord of Misrule, whom they would follow even into the church, dancing, and swinging their may-boughs like very devils." It was about this little parish prince of the May-day and not of the Christmas revels, that Alfred Noyes wrote his famous and light-hearted poem *The Lord of Misrule*, in which

"Like a sunlit sea-wave,  
A green and crimson sea-wave,  
A frolic of madcap May-folk  
Came whooping through the door."

and

"High in the old oak pulpit  
This Lord of all Misrule—  
I think it was Will Summers  
That once was Shakespeare's fool"—

preached the Lord of Misrule's sermon:

"This is the sign we bring you  
Before the darkness fall:  
We tell you He is risen again.  
Our God hath burst his prison again.  
The Lord of life is risen again.  
And love is Lord of all."


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001512/18641224/011/0004
Illustrated Weekly News - Saturday 24 December 1864

THE LORD OF MISRULE IN OLDEN TIMES.

His lordship seems have been very doubtful character, for many —especially divines— abuse him roundly, whilst others are equally vehement in his praise. He seems to have been no mean man for his short time of power. At Cambridge and Oxford, this Christmas prince was annually elected by the Fellows from among themselves, and his sovereignty lasted for twelve days. The societies of law also had their Lord of Misrule; and the Lord Mayor of London and the sheriffs severally appointed their "Masters of Merry Disports." The Lords of Misrule did not even end here. They would appear to have been as numerous as those other Lords of Misrule who throng the House of Peers, "for," says Stowe, "there was in the King’s house, wheresoever lodged, a Lord of Misrule, and the like had ye in the house of every nobleman of honour or good worship, were he spiritual temporal."

What enormities these unruly lords were guilty of not explained by history, but their misdeeds seem to have been heavy and numerous; for, from their high position, they fell into great disrepute, and eventually were suppressed by an alarmimg proclamation issued by Henry the Eighth. The bishops had long since given them up; the inns of law and the colleges had declared that the sports were inconsistent with the discipline of the students. Reverend gentlemen had denounced these lords and their associates in language which, unless it had been uttered by clerical lips, we should almost be tempted to call coarse. "They have their hobbiehorses, dragons, and other antiques, together with their dirtie pipers and thunderyng drummers; then march these neathen companies towards the churchyards, their pipers pipyng, drummers thunderyng, their stumppes danacying, their belles jyngling, their handkerchiefs swyngyng about their heades like madmen, their hobbie-horses and other monsters skyrmyshyng amongst the throng like imps incarnate." Another divine denounced these "Bacchanalian Christmasses" on account of their "manner of solemnising being spent in revelling, epicurisme, wantonnesse, idleness, dancing, drinking, stage-plaies, masques, and carnale pompe and jollity." The custom, however, was not entirely suppressed until Henry the Eighth issued his thunder. It was "ordejned that if any persons did disguise themselves in apparel and cover their faces with visors, gathering a company together, naming themselves mummers, which used to come to the dwelling-places of men of honour and other substantiall persons, whereupon murders, felonie, and other great hurt, and inconveniences have aforetime grown, and hereafter be like to come, by the colour thereof, if the sayde disorder shonld continue not reformed, &c.; that then they should be arrested by the king's liege people as vagabonds, and be committed to the gaole without ball or mainprise for the space of three months."

The best account we have of one of these exhibitions is that given by Warton of the show that annnaily took place in the Temple. The elected prince would assume a variety of titles. He would call himself—The most magnificent and renowed William, by the favour fortune, Prince of Whitefriara, Lord of Blacfriars, High Regent of Bouverie-street, Duke of St Dunstan, Marquis of Thames, Landgrave of Fetter-lane, Count Palatine of Pump-court, Chief Bailiff of Essex street, High Ruler of Chancery-lane, Governor of the Stairs, sole Commander of all Titles, Tournaments, and Triumphs, Superintendent all Solemnities whatever. The mock monarch was, during his twelve days’ reign, attended by his lord keeper, lord treasurer, with eight white staves, a captain of his band of pensioners, and of his guard. He had two chaplains, who, when they preached before him in the Temple Church, were considered to behave disrespectfully, unless, on ascending the pulpit, they saluted his lordship with three low bows. When the great man dined, either in the hall or in his privy chamber, it was under a cloth of estate. Some good-natured nobleman was obliging enough to lend him the pole-axes carried by his gentlemen pensioners, and the Lord Chief Justice for the time being was expected to send in the venison required for the guests. The most expensive item in the supplies—the wine—fell to the lot of the Lord Mayor and sheriffs. As these roysterers always drink copiously, there must have been few cart-loads of empty bottles to carry away when the twelve days’ drinking was over. On Twelfth Day, at going to church, his Lordship of Misrule received many petitions, which he gave to his Master of Requests, and like other potentates thought no more of them. He also, mimicking the custom of kings, had a favourite, whom, with other gentlemen of high quality, he knighted on returning from church. Now comes the most serious portion of this jocose description. The poor fool who had been this twelve days' monarch had to pay the expenses of the entertainment, and they seldom amounted to less than two thousand pounds. As a salve for this heavy bleeding, the real king at Whitehall knighted the mock king from the Temple.

One George Ferrers, a sucking Lincoln's Inn barrister, had the honour of appearing in his celebrated part as the Lord of Misrule before King Edward VI, when that excellent and learned young monarch kept Christmas and open house— excellent things —at Greenwich. It is reported that his Majesty was much delighted in the diversion, and ordered an excellent sapper to be served to the merry tomfools.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004818/18800110/031/0003
South London Observer - Saturday 10 January 1880
A LORD OF MISRULE IN OLDEN TIME. On the 12th Janaary, 1627, the Templars having resolved on celebrating the festivals of Misrule, chose as their Lord for the occasion a Mr. Palmer, who, late at night, went into Fleet-street to collect his rents. A every door the jovial collectors winded the Temple horn, and if at the second blast the door was not courteously opened, my lord cried out majestically, "Give fire, gunner," and a sturdy smith burst the panels open with a huge sledgehammer. The horrified Lord Mayor being appealed to, soon arrived, attended by ihe watch of the ward and men armed with halberds. At eleven o'clock on the Sunday night the two monarchs came into collision in Hare alley (now Hare-court) The Lord of Misrule bade my Lord Mayor come to him, but Palmer, omitting to take off his hat, the halberds flew sharply round him, his subjects were soundly beaten, and he was dragged off to the Compter. There, with soiled finery, the new year's King was kept two days in durance, the attorney-general at last fetching the fallen monarch away in his own coach. At a court masque soon afterwards King Charles made the two rival potenta.es join nands; but the King of Misrule had, nevertheless, to refund ail the five shillings, he had exacted, and repair all the Fieet-street doors his too handy gunner had destrored.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18311228/015/0003
Morning Post - Wednesday 28 December 1831
POLICE INTELLIGENCE Bow-Street.— The *Lord of Misrule*, aided by the powerful influence of *Sir John Barleycorn*, exerted his powers with more than ordinary alacrity on Monday night in the district of this office; the consequence was that a list of night charge, exceeding in number the usual catalogue of black eyes, cut heads, &c. usually exhibited on a "Saint Monday," was yesterday morning produced before Mr. Minshlll, the Sitting Magistrate, and occupied the time of his Worship during the entire morning. Amongst the number charged were three young gentlemen holding Government situations, named French, Morgan, and Wentworth. It appeared that as they were reeling home at three o'clock in the morning along the Strand, shouting and singing, they came in contact with two policemen, who requested them to "cease their funning." The sprigs of gentility taking umbrage at this interference on the part of "the blue devils" commenced a furious attack upon them, and the constables being obliged, in self-defence, to use their truncheons, Mr. Theopbilus Morgan releived the weight of one of them on his dexter cheek, which completely spoiled its beauty and painted his cambric frill a deep crimson. The Defendants were subsequently secured, after a desperate resistance, and having inflicted sundry wounds and bruises on their adversaries.

The Defendants pleaded "Christmas times," but Mr. Minshull would not admit the plea, and they were each ordered to pay 40s. to the King as a small atonement to his Majesty for having broken his peace.

The other charges were of the usual description, the parties accused coming in general under the description of drunken tailors shoemakers, &c. In most cases small fines were inflicted proportioned to the nature of the several offences.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000609/18951224/002/0001
London Evening Standard - Tuesday 24 December 1895
STRANGE CHRISTMAS REVELS. "As much conducing to the making of gentlemen more fit for their books at other times." Such was the wording of a remonstrance directed against the under barristers of Lincoln's Inn, in the good old days so called, for that they had not danced before the judge on Candlemas according to an ancient custom. It is a pathetic reminder. and likely enough an honest, at the adage "All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy" be taken as the truth. Yet, when one learns the kind of revels of which this dancing was a part, one feels disposed to think the books would be a sorry exchange for wild merriment, and many weeks be needed in which to climb down to a mundane state from one so extraodinarily elevated. The mode of procedure at that time—that is to say, before the sweeping away of all such customs in front of the broom of the Commonwealth—was the appointment of Christmas Princes or Lords of Misrule, whose function it was to invent and carry out all manner of pranks to make the season merry. These masters of ceremonies were the luxury of the Royal Family, the wealthy lords of the land, the Inns of Court, the Lord Mayor of London, the Universities, and such important personages and institutions. Their equivalents in other countries were in Ssotland the Abbot of Unreason, in France the Pope of Fools, and in Poland the Republic of Baboonery.

The office of a Lord of Misrule was "to make rarest pastime to delight the beholder his length of tenure from the eve of All Hallows to Candlemas Day. He was an educated man; was allowed his court of subordinates and money to a very extravagant extent. His object was to provide riotous amusement for himself and his patron and his guests, with much intermingling of mischief, disregardful of all reason and every restraint. The Royal honour of knighthood was conferred by Charles I. upon a Christmas Prince of marked renown, who, in addition to the moneys bestowed upon him by his patron for his term of office, spent two thousand pounds during his reign out of his own pocket for the provision of suitable revels. In an ancient quarto, dated 1594, called the "Gesta Grayorum, particulars of the reign of a Christmas Prince of Staple's and Bernard's Inn are given. The lofty sounding titles of this Lord of Misrule were as follows:— The High and Mighty Prince Henry, Prince of Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia and Bernardia, Duke of High and Nether Holborn, Marquess of St. Giles and Tottenham, Count Palatine of Bloomsbury and Clerkenwell, Great Lord of the Cantons of Islington, Kentish Town, &c. Knight and Sovereign of the most heroical Order of the Helmet. To his mock knights were given such titles as "Sir Randall Rackabite of Rascal Hall, in the county of Rakehell: Sir Francis Flatterer, of Fowlshurst: Sir Morgan Mumchance. of Much Mockery, in the Parish of Mad Mopery," and others as dignified in sound and hollow in meaning. On Christmas Day these functionaries, with many others, including a mock Judge, a High Constable, a Lieutenant of the Tower, a Master Marshal, and a Ranger of the Forest, assembled at the inn and enjoyed a magnificent banquet, after which, headed by the Lord of Misrule, whose power, it was quaintly remarked, was "more potent by night", they enjoyed the revels for which he was responsible. These very naturally included a mock trial, in which the Constable Marshal was accused "of suffering great disorders to prevail." to which the Common Serjeant would reply, and would be opposed by the King's Serjeant, the sentence being the committal to a temporary prison, called the Tower, to the one who lost the case through indifferent oratory. Whereupon a rank outrage upon the bearing of punishment with becoming meekness was allowed, in that if the prisoner could contrive to escape and to bring from the buttery into the hall a manchet or small loaf of bread, as proof that he had been there, he was permitted to go a free man. Another prank was less humane. A cat or a fox, if such could be found, was let loose in the hall, then hunted with a couple of dogs. Killing in front of the great fire formed the end of this revel.

The death blow of the Christmas Prince was, as has before been said, dealt by the Commonwealth. But the way was paved by an unseemly piece of conduct by one Mr. Palmer, Lord of Misrule to the Templars for the season of 1627-28. This Mr. Palmer made an unlawf use of his power in that he commanded his officers to collect certain rents that were due to him in Fleet-street and the neighbourhood, if not by fair means then by foul. Foul were the means, so foul that the Prince of Christmas was arrested, and by the Lord Mayor's sentence was imprisoned for two nights in the common lockup, at which juncture the King stepped in, and peace was restored. But since they had thus been swamped in disgrace by their Lord of Misrule. whose ideas were indeed too practical for them, the Tempters determined no more to appoint such a Christmas officer, and the fiat went forth that "for the prevention of that general scandal and obloquie which the House hath heretofore incurred in time of Christmas, there be not any going abroad out of the gates of the House, by any lord or others, to break open any House, or take anything in the name of a rent or a distress." What was done for England Cromwell was done for Scotland by the Restoration, which put an end to the Monastic Prince, the abbot of Unreason. Charles II. was unattended by a "grand Capitaine of mischiefe" when came to the throne, and never since have such revels as he and his like conducted been permitted or encouraged. It is the fashion nowadays to decry Christmas. We have gone to just the opposite extreme of our forefathers. We declare that we shall be glad when Christmas is over; that it is the most miserable time of all the year; that the adjective merry should be changed for melancholy. Is this state of feeling to be accounted for by the assumption that, as a people of habit, we cannot become accustomed to Christmases without mummery? It may be just an example of heredity after all. Our earliest ancestors were addicted to pretence at Yule. Even we read of the ancient Romans in their Saturnalia masquerading in all kinds of ways—men dressed as women, women as men, and so forth. It was the custom of the early Christians to go about disguised, making fun of Pagan rites and ceremonies. Some of us who are alive now can recollect, lingering in out-of-the-way country places, Christmas plays acted by mummers from house to house, with strange characters, such as the Leech. the Turkish Knight, and St. George, and stranger words —indeed, all but gibberish—handed down from generation to generation, and garbled in the handing. It would seem, indeed, that at Christmas we needed a stirring up. Our climate is not cheerful about the end of December. All the masquerading and mumming and merrymaking that the men and women of older days indulged in at any rite kept them warm, and induced them when their blood ran warmly to look upon life through a rosy veil. Their food, too, was invigorating. The "learned mixture" they called Christmas pie, made of neat's tongues, chicken, sugar, lemons, and various kinds of spicery; the wassail bowl of old ale sugared, with apples floating atop: the plum porridge served hot like the modern plum pudding, but half fluid in its consistency—all these essentially Yuletide dainties sound as if they ought to have cheered the hearts of their eaters. The question that naturally arises after the pondering of these matters is, do we retain the jollity of Christmas as a holiday, although these ancient inducements have been stamped out? Or have we missed the happy mean, and are in a fair way to make the season the melancholy one pessimists declare they find it? The answer obviously is this, that we are our own masters, and can treat the festival as we will. No law binds us to merriment, though an unwritten one may to goodwill. Indeed, it is very happily this universal understanding of the message of Christmas that, in many instances, makes the season the time of generosity and friendliness and care for others that it is. Men outgrow their childish enthusiasm for Christmas stockings and Christmas trees very often, but they do not forget that others revel still in manifestations of the kind at Christmas tide.
